IS easy enough to criticise economists: too superior, too blinkered, too often wrong. 
Paul Samuelson, one of the discipline’s great figures, once lampooned stockmarkets for 
predicting nine out of the last five recessions. Economists, in contrast, barely ever 
see downturns coming. They failed to predict the 2007-08 financial crisis.
Yeat this is not the beast test of success. Much as doctors understand diseases but 
cannot predict when you will fall ill, economists’ fundamental mission is not to forecast 
recessions but to explain how the world works. During the summer of 2016, The Economist 
ran a series of briefs on important economic theories that did just that—from the Nash 
equilibrium, a cornerstone of game theory, to the Mundell-Fleming trilemma, which lays bare 
the trade-offs countries face in their management of capital flows, exchange rats and monetary 
policy; from the financial-instability hypothesis of Hyman Minsky to the insights of Samuelson 
and Wolfgang Stolper on trade and wages; from John Maynard Keynes’s thinking on the fiscal 
multiplier to George Akerlof’s work on information asymmetry. We have assembled these articles 
into this collection.

The six breakthroughs are adverts not just for the value of economics, but also for three other 
things: theory, maths and outsiders. More than ever, economics today is an empirical discipline. 
But theorry remains vital. Many policy failures might have been avoided if theoretical insights 
had been properly applied. The trilemma was outlined in the 1960s, and the fiscal multiplier 
dates back to the 1930s; both illuminate the curent stugles of the euro zone and the sometimes 
self-defeating pursuit of austerity. Nor is the body of economic theory complete. From “secular 
stagnation” to climate change, the discipline needs big thinkers as well as big data.

It also needs mathmatics. Economic papers are far too formulaic; models should be a means, not an 
end. But the symbls do matter. The job of economists is to impose mathematical rigour on intuitions 
about markets, economies and people. Maths was needed to formalise most of the ideas in our briefs.

In economics, as in other fields, a fresh eye can also make a big difference. New ideas often meet 
resistance. Mr Akerlof’s paper was rejected by several journals, one on the ground that if it was 
correct, “economics would be different”. Recognition came slowly for many of our theories: Minsky 
stayed in relative obscurity until his death, gaining suprestar status only once the financial crisis 
hit. Economists still tend to look down on outsiders. Behavioural economics has broken down one silo 
by incorporating insights from psychology. More need to disappear: like anthropologists, economists 
should think more about how individuals’ decision-making relates to sotial mores; like physicists, 
they should study instability instead of assuming that economise naturally self-correct.
